[Music]
very good morning to you welcome to
breakfast with roger johnson and louise
minchin hello good morning our headlines
today millions of people are set to be
moved into the highest tier
of restrictions as the nhs struggles to
cope with a record number of coronavirus
cases
boris johnson urges mps to back his
brexit trade deal in a vote
later today good morning a call for a
circuit
break in football the west brom boss sam
allardyce says the sport needs a break
as positive coronavira tests increase in
the premier league
and it's another cold frosty and icy
start to the day there'll be some snow
flowers around once again
i'll tell you where they'll be here on
breakfast
[Music]
it's wednesday the 30th of december our
top story on the programme this morning
millions more people in
england are expected to be moved into
the highest tier level of coronavirus
restrictions
after a record rise in infections the
health secretary matt hancock will make
the announcement in the house of commons
this afternoon
anisa cadre has this report
the centre of southampton empty after
the toughest coronavirus restrictions
came in on boxing day
today the government's expected to
announce more areas of england will
enter
tier iv and there's also talk of whether
four tears is enough
yesterday the uk announced another 53
1335 coveted cases a record daily figure
it's partly down to a christmas lag in
reporting
but also reflects the fast spreading new
variant of the virus
and nhs staff say they are at risk of
becoming overwhelmed
the peak's not going to come for maybe
two weeks from now three weeks from now
um and the big thing for us will be
we've had the christmas
social mixing and questions people will
do the same thing in new year
and then we'll have another peak further
up more than 21 000 people are being
treated in hospitals for covert across
the uk
in wales they're dealing with their
highest level of patience now
this is something that's taking a real
toll on the staff
at some point we will sit down and take
stock i don't think we fully absorbed
the effects on us all psychologically
but at the minute we're very focused
that we've got a job to do we've got
several months more
of the winter to get through and we're
really still in the eye of the storm
in northern ireland hospitals say
although under pressure they are coping
and in scotland people are being urged
to stay at home over new year as cases
hit a record high
in romford patients had to be treated in
parked ambulances
outside the queen's hospital essex has
declared a major incident enabling the
county to seek further support from the
government to address the pressures
meanwhile the prime minister is expected
to decide whether to keep secondary
schools shut in order to try to reduce
coronavirus transmission
nhs providers the group representing
hospitals and other health trusts in
england
want to see the government put more
areas under tier 4 restrictions today
concerned that services are being
stretched to their limits
as many pin their hopes on the vaccine
for normality to return
trying to keep cases down through the
winter remains a priority
anisa cadre bbc news um so you're
watching bbc breakfast at half past
seven here on breakfast
we'll be speaking to the health
secretary matt hancock there's so much
to talk to him
um about today if you've got any
questions as well do send them in and
we'll try and get through some of those
two not least this next story brexit
which of course rumbles on today boris
johnson calling on mps
to back his post-brexit trade deal ahead
of that vote in the house of commons
later today
parliament has of course been recalled
for the vote a day before the brexit
transition period
ends our political correspondent jessica
parker has more
boris johnson will tell the commons it's
a new chapter in our national story
time to reassert global britain his
post-brexit trade deal has the broad
backing of tory mps
including long-standing euro skeptics
there are bits and pieces that we've had
to compromise that we don't like
but overall to produce a
sovereignty compliance deal a free trade
agreement with the eu
where we get uh free access to the
eu single market for our goods without
tariffs and without quantitative
restrictions
is what people said we would never be
able to achieve talks went to the wire
the agreement set to be approved today
will take effect
tomorrow night that is when the uk stops
following eu rules as the transition
period comes to an
end up against no deal we accept this
deal
sakir stama has instructed his mps to
back the deal
he said it's thin but suggested it's
better than no deal
but some labour mps are expected to defy
him
i think kiara is making a fundamental
mistake
in whipping to do this i think if he'd
whip to abstain he'd have a unified
party
i think also as well our comms on this
on why we're voting for this have been
i think appalling and i think what we
are doing is walking
in yet again to a long-term bear trap
that the government has put down
brexit has often caused division even at
times
political turmoil but after years of
heated debate and
hard negotiations the country will soon
start to find out what brexit really
means
jessica barker bbc news
rescuers in croatia have spent the night
searching for survivors after a powerful
earthquake hit the country at least
seven people including a 12 year old
girl died
and there was widespread damage the
epicenter of the quake was just 30 miles
from the capital zagreb
keith doyle reports
[Music]
a man is rescued from a crushed car
he is reunited with his child who had
already been pulled free
it was a little after midday when the
6.4 magnitude earthquake hit
the strongest to hit croatia in decades
the town of petrinia took to full force
half of its buildings have been
destroyed according to the mayor who was
talking to reporters when the quake
struck
a 12 year old girl died these women were
able to walk away from the collapsed
town hall
others were moved to safety however they
could be
rescuers from all across croatia
searched amongst the rubble for
survivors
this man said i don't have anything left
everything crumbled
in the nearby city of sisak the mayor
was holding a news conference when the
tremors started
the main hospital here was badly damaged
it was also felt hundreds of miles away
in the slovenian parliament building
the town of petrinia was almost
destroyed during the brutal civil war
in the 1990s today's earthquake has
brought devastation here once again
keith doyle bbc news the
u.s president-elect joe biden has
strongly criticized donald trump
for the slow pace at which americans are
being vaccinated against coronavirus
speaking
just weeks ahead of taking office mr
biden said the rollout of the pfizer and
modena jabs had fallen well below
expectations and promised to ramp up a
program of immunization
i'm going to move heaven and earth to
get us going in the right direction
i'm going to use my power under the
defense production act when i'm sworn in
in order in order private industry to
accelerate
the making of the materials needed for
the vaccines
as well as protective gear vice
president harris and i
have been speaking to with county
officials
mayors governors of both parties to
speed up the distribution of the
vaccines across the nation
the duke and duchess of sussex have
shared their hopes for 2021 with a
little help from their 19 month old
toddler archie
after me ready happy happy
new year
[Music]
there's nothing like a giggle is there
from a little baby uh prince harry and
megan's son has spoken publicly i love
his spoken it's so sweet
said about three words publicly for the
first time in the royal couple's
new podcast for spotify the half-hour
holiday special features celebrities
including
sir elton john and james corden they
reflected on the past year and paid
tribute to health care workers for their
sacrifices
let's have a look first look at the
weather shall we very cold start this
morning matt and those figures
just prove it to indeed morning roger
louise very good morning to you as well
coldest of the moment to start winning
in the highlands of scotland
minus nine degrees but a widespread
frost elsewhere across the country
and once again to go with some icy
conditions there's a little bit of
sleeping snow around
let me show you where the latest of
those showers have been
quite icy particularly around north east
wales and in towards parts of northwest
england cheshire
sleet and snow here same two in northern
ireland and a bit more the way
significant snow pushing in towards the
highlands at the moment
rain around the coast for also it's a
dry and bright start for many it will
stay that way any sunshine or through
england whales generally hazes we see
rain affect south wales
down in towards the southwest later snow
continues to fall across parts of
the north and west of scotland maybe
some good covering of possible of the
higher ground here as far south as
atrocities southern scotland staying dry
and bright fewer showers into northern
ireland potentially
this afternoon but showers keep going
into north wales rain around the coast a
little bit of snow over the higher
ground
but towards the southwest well many will
see rain this afternoon
snow across the moors and that snow will
extend across the downs in other
southern counties of england
as we head through the evening and into
the night so a covering of snow possible
here and there
rain though for many and then as we go
into tonight mostly snow flowers to
north wales northwest england
more significant snow through eastern
scotland and another cold and
icy start to new year's eve more on that
though in about now it's time back to
both
yeah plenty of more um thank you very
much it really is chilly out there
thanks matt nice for
you to be here thank you thank you so
we'll have a look at the papers see
what's making the headlines on new
year's eve eve
new tears eve is the headline in the sun
this morning
which reports that two-thirds of england
is set to be under the toughest
coronavirus restrictions from as
early as tomorrow the paper also
suggests
that school years 11 and 13 are now
likely to be delayed from returning
until the 11th of january remember they
were the ones that were due to go back
on time
millions more people will be placed
under these stay-at-home measures that's
according to the times it reports that
hospitals in london are drawing up plans
to send intensive care patients to other
parts of the country
amid increasing alarm that covid cases
have reached a record
high online the eye newspaper reports
the prime minister has been warned that
the nhs faces a catastrophe in the new
year
without a nationwide lockdown
and the mail reports that boris johnson
is to hail a new chapter in britain's
history as his eu trade deal goes before
parliament the paper says mps will spend
five hours scrutinizing the 80-page bill
which replaced which places
the trade deal into law let's have a
look inside some of the papers and this
is inside
the sun um talking to matt then about
the cold
weather the cold start this morning a
lot of snow yesterday in many parts of
the country some pictures here from
mainly from the north from wakefield
from barnsley from stanley bridge in
greater manchester but also from
worcestershire as well
people enjoying the snow with a
prediction that there could be six
inches of snow
for new year it says here but uh
i mean look it's a nice thing that some
people are enjoying it isn't it yeah and
this is dorset actually the main picture
so it's further south too
um this is from this is in quite a few
of the papers this morning it's about
cups of tea i have quite a lot of cups
of tea and actually apparently
um i'm not over 85 but if you if you are
over 85 it's a good thing
how many do you have a date i have too
many i was gonna say two
only two no i mean what probably more
than five i would say
yeah and probably i i've cut them down a
bit actually because i think they don't
also
it's got caffeine doesn't it um
pensioners who drink more than five cups
a day have been found to have better
brain function than their counterparts
who don't according to the researchers
and they studied 676 people over 85
tea drinkers who enjoyed more than five
cups a day were shown to have more focus
and a sustained attention span this is
research from newcastle
university well i love a cup of tea um
you've got dogs so you'll
you'll empathize with this not that many
dogs though you know i have one
um but this is incredible festive season
question mark
we're dog-tired the wolfhounds that
turned into real party animals this is
that claire and jason
mather uh they've got nine dogs
uh here they're all all lined up for
their christmas lunch it's very
organized i have to say all their
noses in their bowls here they are all
flaked out afterwards just like that you
do get sort of critical mass once you're
past two you might as well have
i mean nine is obviously a lot because
you can't fit them in the middle well
that's our little talk out
this morning before i left the house and
there you are at four o'clock in the
morning
rooting around picking message picking
messages up from the
lawn and you just think really what a
glamorous life yeah but the thing is you
don't want it to get used to you waking
up at 4 00 a.m or it's going to be
he's going to expect you to do that and
there's lots of tributes being paid
actually
in the papers as well to um the
pioneering designer they put it here
i'm in the mail pierre cardone he died
at the age of
98. um and lots of really kind of sci-fi
um things you know he really changed
suits for example the beatles in 1963
look the sharp suits that they were
wearing so yeah lots of people
talking about him yesterday
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live in the app
and get the full story with bbc dot co
dot uk
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with bbc news